# CS 1541
Computer Architecture - Spring 2023

## Course Information

**Taught by:** Wonsun Ahn (wahn at pitt dot edu)
  * GitHub username: wonsunahn

**Class Time:**

  * Hours: Mon/Wed 4:30 PM - 5:45 PM @ 5313 Sennott Square

**Instructor's Office Hours:**

  * Chat on Microsoft Teams: Mon-Fri 9:00 AM - 6:00 PM
  * Physical Office Hours: Mon/Wed 2:30 PM - 4:00 PM @ 5423 Sennott Square, or by appointment

**Class GitHub repo:** https://www.github.com/wonsunahn/CS1541_Spring2023

**Required Texts:**
* Computer Organization and Design - The Hardware/Software Interface
  By David Patterson and John Hennessy
  Fifth Edition - Morgan & Kaufmann.

This course examines computer architecture and hardware system organization.
Topics include: CPU organization and control, instruction set implementation,
cache and memory organizations, parallel architectures and GPUs.  Through the
lecture, you will learn what constrains CPU performance and various techniques
you can use to get around those constraints.  You will also learn how to build
software simulators that evaluate and estimate the performance of a CPU design,
without having to physically manufacture the physical hardware.

This class uses the _traditional class_ learning model, meaning lectures
will happen during class time and assignments are expected to be done
outside of class time.  Please refer to the [class schedule](schedule.md).

## Grading

* Midterms (45%):
  * Midterm 1 - 22.5%
  * Midterm 2 - 22.5%
* Projects (20%):
  * Project 1 - 10%
  * Project 2 - 10%
* Homeworks (20%):
  * Homework 1 - 5%
  * Homework 2 - 5%
  * Homework 3 - 5%
  * Homework 4 - 5%
* Participation (15%)
  * TopHat Attendance
  * TopHat lecture questions
  * Teams participation

TopHat questions will be released from time to time to review lecture
materials.  They will be mostly multiple choice or fill-in-the-blank questions.
Half of the points will be awarded for just submitting the answers and the
other half will be awarded only for correct answers.  The purpose is to make
sure that everyone is following the lecture material (in a no-child-left-behind
sense).  Hence you are free to discuss your solutions with your peers on Teams
if you aren't sure (in fact you are encouraged to).  I will give a thumbs up to
the correct answer, or leave hints if nobody got it.

More in-depth questions that apply your knowledge will be posed for the
homeworks.  There will also be two projects that involves writing a CPU
simulator using the C programming language.  Homeworks and projects are
individual work, so you are forbidden from discussing your solutions with your
peers.

Exams will NOT be allowed to be made up except with a valid and verified excuse
(generally medical - others are left to the discretion of the instructor).

The following grading scale will be used.  Note that I generally do _not_ round
grades up.

Score  | Grade
-----: | ------------------------------
100.00-93.00 | A (A+ for extraordinary work)
92.99-90.00  | A-
89.99-87.00  | B+
86.99-83.00  | B
82.99-80.00  | B-
79.99-77.00  | C+
76.99-73.00  | C
72.99-70.00  | C-
69.99-67.00  | D+
66.99-63.00  | D
62.99-60.00  | D-
59.99-0.00   | F

## Assignment submission

All projects, homeworks, and exams will be submitted using GradeScope.

There is no late submission for homeworks and exams.

There is late submission for projects.  Late projects will receive a -5
percentage point penalty per day (e.g., if you would have received a 90% on an
assignment, but you turned it in 3 days late, you would receive 90 - 15 =
75%.).  

## Programming Language Selection

For all projects, the class will use the C programming language.  C is the
language of choice for software simulators for CPU designs.

## Participating in Class

Questions and comments are invited and strongly encouraged.  If you have a view
point or experience that may enrich the class, please jump in!  There are
several ways you can participate:

1. In-class

    If you have a question, please interrupt me and interject.  Interrupting
me is not rude, it's a necessity.  I have a tendency to keep talking if not
interrupted.

2. Offline

    Please use the Teams "Posts" tab on the "General" channel if you have a
general question or comment about the lecture.  If you have a question about a
specific topic for which there is a dedicated channel, please use that channel.
Channels for homeworks and projects will be added on as the class progresses.
Remember, you are encouraged to answer as well as ask questions!  I will give a
thumbs up on verified answers or I will add a few more things if needed.

    You can also DM (direct message) me or another student in the class.
Again, select the class in the "Teams" menu and then click on the "..." context
menu beside the "CS 1541 Computer Architecture" team name.  Please select the
top-most item: "Manage Team".  There, you should be able to see the statuses of
all students in the class, and if you hover over the name of any student, you
should see options to initiate a chat, email, or a call with that individual.

3. Email / Canvas messages

    For the fastest response, please use Teams.

When you ask a question about a project, please submit your source code to
GradeScope so that I can reproduce your error.  Also, describe precisely the
steps I should take to reproduce your error.  Before you do this, it is very
hard for me to help you.

I will try to get back to all offline communications within 24 hours of
receipt.  Even if I'm logged into Teams, please understand that I may be away
from my desk or working on something else.  Meanwhile, feel free to answer each
other's questions!

## Disability Services Statement

"The Office of Disability Resources and Services (DRS) provides a broad range
of support services to assist students with disabilities. Services include, but
are not limited to, tape-recorded textbooks, sign language interpreters,
adaptive and transportation. Contact DRS at 412-648-7890 or 412-383-1355 (TTY)
in 216 William Pitt Union or see www.drs.pitt.edu for more computer technology,
Braille translation, and nonstandard exam arrangements, DRS can also assist
students with accessibility to campus housing information."

The instructor will work to the best of their ability to accommodate any issues
arising from a disability that a student has, but he must be aware of it in
order to accommodate it.  Please inform me as soon as possible if you have a
disability which you think may hinder your success in the course and we (along
with the DRS) should be able to work around it.

## Academic Integrity Statement

Cheating/plagiarism will _not_ be tolerated. Students suspected of violating
the [SCI Academic Integrity
Policy](https://www.sci.pitt.edu/student-resources/policies/academic-integrity-policy)
will receive a minimum sanction of a zero score for the exam or assignment.

Some guidelines:

_1. For TopHat lecture questions, you are free to share and discuss your answers._

_2. For all homeworks, projects, and exams, viewing the work done by your
classmates (or a 3rd source) before submission is considered cheating.  Showing
your work is also considered to be abetting cheating._ 

_3. If you have a question that does not require showing your work, I encourage
you to post it publicly on the appropriate Teams channel.  Keeping it public
acts as a psychological guardrail; if you are hesitant about communicating
publicly, chances are that you subconsciously are aware that you are
compromising your integrity._

_4. If you have a question that does require showing your work, please initiate
a chat with your instructor on Teams or come to office hours._

## Back to In-Person

The university policy is to be back to full in-person.  That means we are back
to pre-COVID rules concerning remote classes: it does not exist, as a general
rule.  There are two exceptions:

_1. If you have to quarantine due to contact with COVID.  Either you have a
positive test result or you are waiting for test results._

_2. If you have a family or medical emergency that would cause you to miss
class.  Rather than miss class, if you are able to participate over Zoom, I
will allow it._

For the above exceptions, I will create Zoom sessions on demand.  These Zoom
sessions are only available to affected students and are protected by a
password which is distributed individually.  Please notify me as soon as you
are affected so I can make arrangements.
